**Financial Accounting** 12e 

## Libby • Libby • Hodge 

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

## Learning Objectives 

After studying this chapter, you should be able to: 

**11-1** Explain the role of stock in the capital structure of a corporation. **11-2** Compute and analyze the earnings per share ratio. 

**11-3** Describe the characteristics of common stock and report common stock transactions. **11-4** Discuss and report dividends. **11-5** Compute and analyze the dividend yield ratio. **11-6** Discuss and report stock dividends and stock splits. **11-7** Describe the information reported on the statement of stockholders’ equity. **11-8** Describe the characteristics of preferred stock and report preferred stock transactions. **11-9** Discuss the impact of stock transactions on cash flows. 

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-2** 

## Advantages of a Corporation 

The corporate form of business has a critical advantage over sole proprietorships and partnerships because they can raise large amounts of capital from both large and small investors. 

- Shares of stock may be purchased in small amounts. 

 Ownership interests can be transferred easily through the sale of shares on established markets such as the New York Stock Exchange or the NASDAQ Stock Exchange. 

- Stock ownership provides investors with limited liability. 

Many Americans own stock either directly or indirectly through a mutual fund or pension program. Stock ownership offers the opportunity to earn higher returns than a bank account or investing in corporate bonds. Unfortunately, stock ownership also involves risks. The appropriate balance between risk and the expected return on an investment depends on individual preferences. 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-3** 

## Microsoft 2023 Environmental Sustainability Report 

**==> picture [445 x 53] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [688 x 336] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-4** 

## Stockholders’ Equity Section of the Balance Sheet 

The stockholders’ equity section of the balance sheet lists two primary sources of equity: 

**1. Contributed capital from the sale of stock.** Contributed capital is the amount in the Common Stock and Paid-in Capital accounts. 

**2. Earned capital generated by the company’s profit-making activities.** Earned capital is recorded in Retained Earnings (or “accumulated deficit” when negative). 

**==> picture [638 x 266] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-5** 

## Learning Objective 11-1 

**11-1** Explain the role of stock in the capital structure of a corporation. 

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-6** 

## Ownership of a Corporation 

Corporations enjoy a continuous existence separate and apart from its owners. A corporation can . . . 

Own assets 

Incur liabilities 

Sue others and be sued 

Expand and contract in size 

Enter into contracts independently of its stockholder owners 

Corporations are created by application to a state government (not the federal government). Corporations are governed by a board of directors elected by the stockholders. 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-7** 

## Benefits of Stock Ownership 

Owners of common stock (known as stockholders or shareholders) receive a number of benefits: 

 **A voice in management:** vote in the stockholders’ meeting on major issues concerning management of the corporation. 

- **Dividends** : Proportional share of 

- the distribution of profits. 

 **Residual claim** : Proportional share of the distribution of remaining assets upon the liquidation of the company. 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-8** 

## Authorized, Issued, and Outstanding Shares (1 of 3) 

The authorized number of shares is the maximum number of shares of stock a corporation can issue as specified in its charter. 

**==> picture [351 x 356] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Issued  Unissued<br>shares  are  shares  are the<br>the total  shares that<br>number of  have  never<br>shares sold  been sold.<br>to the public.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


> © McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

**11-9** 

## Authorized, Issued, and Outstanding Shares (2 of 3) 

**==> picture [606 x 432] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Outstanding<br>Shares (owned by<br>stockholders)<br>Unissued<br>Issued Shares<br>Shares<br>Treasury Shares<br>(reacquired by the<br>corporation)<br>Authorized number of shares is the<br>maximum number of shares of stock<br>a corporation can issue.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-10** 

## Authorized, Issued, and Outstanding Shares (3 of 3) 

A few states do not allow treasury stock. In these states companies must retire shares that are repurchased. Microsoft is incorporated in one of those states (Washington State). In fiscal 2023, Microsoft repurchased and retired 69 million shares of common stock. Since those shares are not listed as treasury stock, Microsoft’s number of outstanding shares is equal to its number of issued shares. 

**==> picture [369 x 231] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-11** 

## Learning Objective 11-2 

**11-2** Compute and analyze the earnings per share ratio. 

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-12** 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

## Earnings per Share (EPS) 

## **How well is a company performing?** 

**==> picture [690 x 58] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [647 x 218] intentionally omitted <==**

## **Companies are required to report EPS on their income statements.** 

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-13** 

## Learning Objective 11-3 

**11-3** Describe the characteristics of common stock and report common stock transactions. 

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-14** 

## Common Stock Transactions (1 of 2) 

**owners .** Common stock is held by investors who are the of a corporation 

## **Stockholders have the right to:** 

- Vote 

- Share in profits of the business through dividends 

- Elect the board of directors who hire and monitor the executives who 

manage a company’s activities on a day-to-day basis 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-15** 

## Common Stock Transactions (2 of 2) 

**Par value** is the nominal value per share, established in the corporate charter.* 

Par Value Market Value  

**Legal capital** is the amount of capital, required by the state, that must remain invested in the business. 

* There are some states that require the issuance of **no-par value stock** . When a corporation issues no-par stock, legal capital is defined by state law. 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-16** 

## Initial Sale of Stock 

An **initial public offering,** or IPO, involves the very first sale of a company’s stock to the public (i.e., when the company first “goes public”). Additional sales of new stock to the public are called **seasoned offerings.** 

Assume Microsoft sold 1 million shares of its $0.00000625 par value common stock for $375 per share. 

The company would record the following journal entry: 

**==> picture [636 x 180] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-17** 

## Sale of Stock in Secondary Markets 

- When a company sells stock to the public, the transaction is between the issuing corporation and the investor. 

- Subsequent to the initial sale, investors can sell shares to other investors without directly affecting the corporation. Stockholders expect to earn money on their investments through possible dividends and increases in a company’s stock price. **The corporation is not a part of the transaction** and therefore does not receive or pay anything. 

**==> picture [387 x 241] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [254 x 173] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-18** 

## Stock Issued for Employee Compensation (1 of 2) 

- Managers may not act in the owners’ best interest. Compensation packages can be developed to reward employees for meeting goals important to stockholders. 

- Another strategy is to offer employees stock, either directly through stock awards or indirectly through stock options. 

   - **Stock awards** grant shares of stock to employees that vest on future dates. 

   - **Stock options** give employees the right to buy stock in the future at a fixed price. 

- Both stock awards and stock options provide incentives for employees to take actions that increase a company’s stock price (thereby aligning their interest with the interest of stockholders). 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-19** 

## Stock Issued for Employee Compensation (2 of 2) 

Microsoft uses equity compensation to incentivize its CEO and other high-level executives as shown in the following disclosure: 

**==> picture [529 x 423] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-20** 

## Repurchase of Stock 

- A corporation repurchase its stock from existing stockholders for a number of reasons. 

   - One common reason is the existence of an employee bonus plan that provides workers with shares of the company’s stock as part of their compensation. 

      - Due to SEC regulations, it is less costly to give employees repurchased shares than to issue new ones. 

      - Reissuing treasury stock avoids diluting existing shareholders’ investments. 

- When companies repurchase shares from the market, they pay cash and receive their own stock. Stock that has been repurchased and is held by the . 

- issuing corporation is called **treasury stock** 

   - Treasury stock is not an asset, rather it is a contra-equity account. 

   - Treasury stock is shown as a negative number on the balance sheet. 

   - The treasury stock is considered issued but not outstanding. Thus it is not removed from the Common Stock account. 

- Treasury shares have no voting, dividend, or other stockholder rights while they are held as treasury stock. 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-21** 

## Repurchase and Reissuance of Stock (1 of 2) 

IBM repurchased 100,000 shares of its common stock when it was selling for $140 per share. 

**==> picture [584 x 130] intentionally omitted <==**

Treasury Stock is a contra-equity account, not an asset! 

IBM reissued 10,000 shares of treasury stock at $150 per share. 

**==> picture [585 x 173] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-22** 

## Repurchase and Reissuance of Stock (2 of 2) 

IBM reissued 10,000 shares of treasury stock at $130 per share. 

**==> picture [601 x 179] intentionally omitted <==**

- When a company reissues (sells) its treasury stock, it **does not report an accounting profit or loss** on the transaction, even if it sells the stock for more or less than it originally cost to repurchase the shares. 

- GAAP does not permit a corporation to report income or losses from investments in its own stock because transactions with the owners are not considered normal profit-making activities. 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-23** 

## Exhibit 11.2 

Excerpt from the Consolidated Balance Sheets for IBM 

**==> picture [705 x 359] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-24** 

## Learning Objective 11-4 

**11-4** Discuss and report dividends. 

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-25** 

## Dividends on Common Stock 

- The return from investing in a company’s common stock can come from two sources: stock price appreciation and dividends. 

- Some investors prefer to buy stocks that pay little or no dividends. 

   - Companies that reinvest the majority of their earnings back into their operations tend to increase their future earnings potential and their stock price. 

   - Wealthy investors in high tax brackets prefer to receive their return in the form of higher stock prices because capital gains may be taxed at a lower rate than dividend income. 

- Other investors, such as those who are retired and need a steady income, prefer to receive their return in the form of dividends. 

   - Retirees seek stocks that will pay relatively high dividends, such as utility stocks. 

- Analysts compute the dividend yield ratio to evaluate a company’s dividend policy. 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-26** 

## Key Dividend Dates (1 of 2) 

The declaration and payment of a dividend involve several key dates. 

**1. Declaration date.** The date on which the board of directors officially approves the dividend. As soon as the board declares a dividend, a liability is created and must be recorded. 

**2. Date of record.** The date on which the corporation prepares the list of current stockholders who will receive the dividend payment. The dividend is payable only to those names listed on the record date. No journal entry is made on this date. 

**3. Date of payment.** The date on which cash is disbursed to pay the dividend liability. 

**==> picture [497 x 199] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [249 x 157] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-27** 

## Key Dividend Dates (2 of 2) 

Date of Declaration: Assume Microsoft declared a $5,066 million dividend on September 20, 2022: 

**==> picture [640 x 145] intentionally omitted <==**

## Date of Payment: On December 8, 2022, the liability is paid. 

**==> picture [673 x 155] intentionally omitted <==**

Note: The corporation must have sufficient retained earnings (or current period net income) and enough cash to cover the amount of the dividend. 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-28** 

## Impact of Dividends on Stock Price 

**==> picture [449 x 50] intentionally omitted <==**

- The **ex-dividend date** is the date two days before the date of record. This date is established by the stock exchanges to account for the fact that it takes time (typically three days) to officially transfer stock from a seller to a buyer. 

- If someone buys stock before the ex-dividend date, they will be listed as the owner and receive the dividend. If someone buys stock on or after the ex-dividend date, the previous owner will be listed as the owner of the dividend. 

- Stock prices often fall on the ex-dividend date since the stock no longer includes the right to receive the next dividend. 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-29** 

## Learning Objective 11-5 

**11-5** Compute and analyze the dividend yield ratio. 

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-30** 

## Dividend Yield 

**==> picture [480 x 54] intentionally omitted <==**

How much does a company pay out in dividends each year relative to its share price? 

**==> picture [618 x 96] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [287 x 127] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [336 x 126] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-31** 

## Learning Objective 11-6 

**11-6** Discuss and report stock dividends and stock splits. 

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-32** 

## Nature of Stock Dividends (1 of 2) 

- **Stock dividends** represent a distribution of additional shares of stock to stockholder on a pro rata basis at no cost to the stockholder. 

   - Stockholders retain the same percentage ownership after stock dividends are distributed. 

- _Therefore, a stock dividend by itself has no economic value!_ 

- • Stock dividends do not change the stock’s par value or total stockholders’ equity. 

- The stock market reacts immediately when a stock dividend is issued. 

   - The stock price falls. 

   - The lower market price may make the stock more attractive to new investors. 

**==> picture [448 x 145] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-33** 

## Nature of Stock Dividends (2 of 2) 

Small Large Stock dividend < 20–25% Stock dividend > 20–25% Record at current market value Record at par value of stock. of stock. 

The entry for a stock dividend is a transfer from the Retained Earnings account to the Common Stock account (and Additional Paid-in Capital account for small stock dividends). 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-34** 

## Stock Dividends 

**Large Stock Dividend:** Assume Microsoft issued 40 million shares of its $0.00000625 par value stock.  On the date of declaration: 

**==> picture [555 x 142] intentionally omitted <==**

**Small Stock Dividend:** Assume Microsoft issued 4 million shares of its $0.00000625 par value stock when it was trading at $375 per share. On the date of declaration: 

**==> picture [535 x 167] intentionally omitted <==**

_NOTE: Regardless of whether a stock dividend is classified as large or small, there is no change in the total amount of stockholders’ equity!_ 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-35** 

## Stock Splits 

- Stock splits are not dividends. In a stock split, a company gives stockholders a specified number of additional shares for each share that they currently hold. 

- Companies do not make journal entries to record stock splits. 

- The company reduces the par value of its stock so that the total dollar amount in the Common Stock account remains unchanged. 

- In both a stock dividend and a stock split, the stockholder receives more shares of stock without having to invest additional resources to acquire the shares. 

- A stock dividend requires a journal entry; a stock split does not but is disclosed in the notes to the financial statements. 

**==> picture [588 x 189] intentionally omitted <==**

> © McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

**11-36** 

## Stock Dividend versus Stock Split 

Assume that a corporation had 300,000 shares of $1 par value common stock outstanding before a **100% stock dividend** versus **a two-for-one** stock split. This chart shows the comparative effects of a large stock dividend versus a stock split. 

**==> picture [629 x 215] intentionally omitted <==**

In both a stock dividend and a stock split, the stockholder receives more shares of stock. 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-37** 

## Learning Objective 11-7 

**11-7** Describe the information reported on the statement of stockholders’ equity. 

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-38** 

Exhibit 11.3 Statement of Stockholders’ Equity for Microsoft 

**==> picture [552 x 476] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-39** 

## Learning Objective 11-8 

**11-8** Describe the characteristics of preferred stock and report preferred stock transactions. 

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-40** 

## Preferred Stock Transactions 

**Less risky because of priority payments of dividends and assets before common stock Typically does not have Typically has a fixed voting rights dividend rate** 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-41** 

## Dividends on Preferred Stock (1 of 2) 

**Preferred stock offers a dividend preference over common stock. Current dividend preference** : Requires a company to pay current dividends to preferred stockholders before paying dividends to common stockholders. _After this is met then dividends can be paid to common stockholders._ 

**Cumulative dividend preference** : Requires any unpaid dividends on preferred stock to accumulate. This amount, called **dividends in arrears** , must be paid before common dividends are paid. 

_If preferred stock is_ _**noncumulative** , any dividends not declared in previous years are permanently lost and will never be paid._ 

_Note: Dividends in arrears are disclosed in the notes to the financial statements. They are not a liability until the board of directors declares them._ 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-42** 

## Dividends on Preferred Stock (2 of 2) 

## **Wally Company has the following stock outstanding:** 

**==> picture [437 x 77] intentionally omitted <==**

Assume a current dividend preference only: 

**==> picture [466 x 90] intentionally omitted <==**

Assume the preferred stock is cumulative and that dividends have been in arrears for two years: 

**==> picture [510 x 156] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-43** 

## Preferred Stock and Limited Voting Rights 

**==> picture [447 x 51] intentionally omitted <==**

Although not typical, some preferred stock has special voting rights. For example, the excerpt below is from Public Storage’s 2023 Annual Report: 

**==> picture [634 x 274] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-44** 

## Learning Objective 11-9 

**11-9** Discuss the impact of stock transactions on cash flows. 

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-45** 

## Financing Activities 

**==> picture [424 x 51] intentionally omitted <==**

Transactions involving stock have a direct impact on the capital structure of a business. The cash inflows and outflows associated with these transactions are reported in the **Financing Activities** section of the statement of cash flows. 

**==> picture [551 x 158] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-46** 

## Exhibit 11.4 

## Excerpt from Statement of Cash Flows for Microsoft 

**==> picture [696 x 353] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-47** 

## Chapter Supplement: Accounting for the Equity of Sole Proprietorships 

## Owners’ Equity for a Sole Proprietorship 

**==> picture [596 x 320] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
A sole proprietorship is an unincorporated<br>business owned by one person.<br>Two equity accounts<br>Capital account Drawing (or withdrawal) account<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-48** 

## Exhibit 11.5: Accounting for Owner’s Equity for a Sole Proprietorship (1 of 2) 

Hans Solo started an aviation business by investing $150,000 of personal savings. The journal entry to record this business formation is: 

**==> picture [560 x 148] intentionally omitted <==**

Each month during the year (so 12 times total) Hans withdrew $1,000 cash from the business for personal living expenses. 

**==> picture [567 x 153] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-49** 

## Exhibit 11.5: Accounting for Owner’s Equity for a Sole Proprietorship (2 of 2) 

At the end of Year 1, $418,000 of revenues and $400,000 of expenses were closed to the owner’s capital account as follows: 

**==> picture [502 x 193] intentionally omitted <==**

The drawing account was closed as follows: 

**==> picture [502 x 151] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-50** 

## Exhibit 11.5 

## Accounting for Owner’s Equity for a Sole Proprietorship 

**==> picture [520 x 332] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-51** 

## Owners’ Equity for a Partnership 

- A partnership is owned by two or more individuals. The partnership agreement specifies the division of income, management responsibilities, transfer or sale of partnership interests, disposition of assets upon liquidation, and procedures to be followed in case of the death of a partner. 

- Separate capital and drawing accounts are maintained for each partner. 

- Partnership income is divided among the partners according to the partnership agreement. 

- Advantages of a partnership include: 

   - Ease of formation 

   - Complete control by partners 

   - Lack of income taxes on business itself 

- The primary disadvantage of a partnership is unlimited liability of each partner for the partnership’s debts. 

- Partners must report their share of the partnership profits on their individual tax returns. 

- Withdrawals by the partners are not recorded as expenses but rather are treated as distributions of capital. 

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-52** 

## Exhibit 11.6: Accounting for Owner’s Equity for a Partnership (1 of 4) 

Serena and Venus organized Mirror Image Partners on January 1. Serena and Venus contributed cash to the partnership in the amount of $60,000 and $40,000, respectively. 

**==> picture [592 x 202] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [127 x 33] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-53** 

## Exhibit 11.6: Accounting for Owner’s Equity for a Partnership (2 of 4) 

Each month during the year (so 12 times total), Serena withdrew $1,000 cash and Venus withdrew $650 cash for personal use. 

**==> picture [654 x 244] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [65 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-54** 

## Exhibit 11.6: Accounting for Owner’s Equity for a Partnership (3 of 4) 

At the end of Year 1, $630,000 of revenues and $600,000 of expenses were closed to the owners’ capital accounts. The partnership agreement specified Serena would receive 60 percent of earnings and Venus would receive 40 percent. 

**==> picture [555 x 255] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [100 x 560] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-55** 

## Exhibit 11.6: Accounting for Owner’s Equity for a Partnership (4 of 4) 

At the end of Year 1, the drawing accounts were closed. 

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-56** 

## Exhibit 11.6 

## Accounting for Owners’ Equity for a Partnership 

Like a sole proprietorship, a partnership does not report income tax expense on its income statement. Partners must report their share of the partnership profits on their individual tax returns. Also, like sole proprietorships, withdrawals by the partners are not recorded as expenses but rather are treated as distributions of capital. 

**==> picture [647 x 267] intentionally omitted <==**

© McGraw Hill LLC. All rights reserved. No reproduction or distribution without the prior written consent of McGraw Hill LLC. 

**11-57** 

