---
course: "Financial Accounting 1"
course_code: "30692"
tags:
  - "source"
  - course_30692
Title: "Full-material presentation Chapter 8"
Reference: "Course Material"
Created: 2026-05-18
Processed: true
  - "source"
---

**Financial Accounting** 12e

## Libby - Libby - Hodge

Learning Objectives After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

**8-1** Define, classify, and explain the nature of long-lived productive assets and interpret the fixed asset turnover ratio.

**8-2** Apply the cost principle to measure the acquisition and maintenance of property, plant, and equipment.

**8-3** Apply various cost allocation methods as assets are held and used over time.

**8-4** Explain the effect of asset impairment on the financial statements. **8-5** Analyze the disposal of property, plant, and equipment.

**8-6** Apply measurement and reporting concepts for intangible assets and natural resources.

**8-7** Explain how the acquisition, use, and disposal of long-lived assets impact cash flows.

## Understanding the Business

## Learning Objective 8-1

**8-1** Define, classify, and explain the nature of long-lived productive assets and interpret the fixed asset turnover ratio.

## Classifying Long-Lived Assets

## Exhibit 8.1 FedEx Corporation’s Asset Section of the Balance Sheet

## Fixed Asset Turnover

**Fixed Asset Net Sales (or Operating Revenues) = Turnover Average Net Fixed Assets**

This ratio measures the sales dollars generated by each dollar of fixed assets used. A **high rate** suggests **effective management** .

The FedEx ratio for fiscal year ended May 31, 2023 is (in millions):

## Learning Objective 8-2

**8-2** Apply the cost principle to measure the acquisition and maintenance of property, plant, and equipment.

## Measuring and Recording Acquisition Cost (1 of 7)

**Under the cost principle, all reasonable and necessary expenditures made in acquiring and preparing an asset for use** (or sale, as in the case of inventory) **should be recorded as the cost of the asset.** _Interest charges associated with the purchase are recorded as expenses as incurred._

**Acquisition Costs - Buildings, Equipment, etc.**

- Purchase price, sales taxes, legal fees, transportation costs, installation and preparation costs (including renovation and repairs)

- **Acquisition Costs - Land**

- Purchase price, title fees and title insurance, sales commissions, legal fees, delinquent taxes, surveying fees.

Note - We say that the expenditures are **capitalized** when they are recorded as an asset, not as expenses in the current period.

## Measuring and Recording Acquisition Cost (2 of 7)

The **Acquisition Cost** is:

- Net **cash amount paid** for the asset or

- The fair value of the asset given or asset received, whichever is more clearly determined (called the **cash equivalent price** ), when noncash assets are used as payment.

For example, FedEx would calculate the acquisition cost of a new aircraft as follows:

## Measuring and Recording Acquisition Cost (3 of 7)

**Basket Purchase:** When land, buildings, and equipment are purchased as a group the total cost is allocated to each asset in proportion to the asset’s market value relative to the total market value of the assets as a whole **Building Cost = (Market value of building/Total market value of the basket purchase) × Total cost of the basket purchase**

## Measuring and Recording Acquisition Cost (4 of 7)

## Measuring and Recording Acquisition Cost (5 of 7)

**Acquisition for Debt** – Assume FedEx signed a note payable for the new aircraft and paid cash for the transportation and preparation costs.

## Measuring and Recording Acquisition Cost (6 of 7)

## Leasing Long-Term Assets:

- Instead of signing a note payable, companies may choose to **lease** long term assets.

- Companies are required to report most types of leases on the balance sheet as **Operating Lease Assets,** with the related obligations reported as debt entitled Operating Lease Liabilities.

- Because leases confer right-of-use to the company using the asset, these are considered **intangible assets** and are not included in property, plant, and equipment (fixed assets).

- The lessee (the one using the asset) will recognize:

- depreciation of the right-of-use assets and

- - interest on the lease liability.

## Measuring and Recording Acquisition Cost (7 of 7)

- **Acquisition for Equity** FedEx gave ATR 1,000,000 shares of new $1.00 par value common stock with a market value of $10 per share and paid the balance of the plane plus transportation and preparation costs in cash.

|**Debit**|**Credit**|
|---|---|---|
|Aircraft (+A)|26|
|Common Stock (+SE)1|1|
|Additional paid-in capital (+SE)2|9|
|Cash (−A)|16|

_1_ × _1,000,000 shares $1 par 2_ − × _1,000,000 shares $9 excess  ($10 market value $1 par)_

## Measuring and Recording Acquisition Cost Acquisition by Construction (1 of 2)

**Asset cost includes:**

## Measuring and Recording Acquisition Cost Acquisition by Construction (2 of 2)

Assume FedEx constructed a new hangar, paying $8 million in labor costs and $11 million in supplies and materials. FedEx also paid $1 million in interest expense during the year related to the construction project.

## The following journal entry is made to record the asset:

## Repairs, Maintenance, and Improvements (1 of 3)

## Repairs, Maintenance, and Improvements (2 of 3)

To save time, some companies record all expenditures below a certain dollar amount as expenses.  Such policies are acceptable because immaterial amounts will not affect users’ decisions when analyzing financial statements.

Capitalizing expenses will increase assets and net income in the current year, lowering future years’ income by the amount of the annual depreciation.

## Repairs, Maintenance, and Improvements (3 of 3)

**Repairs and maintenance:** FedEx reported $3,357 million in Maintenance and Repairs on its 2023 income statement.

**Improvements:** Assume FedEx spent $300 million to modify the cargo area of its oldest aircraft to reduce weight, resulting in 9 percent greater fuel efficiency and lower operating costs. These expenditures would have been recorded as capital expenditures:

## WorldCom: Hiding Billions in Expenses through Capitalization

- When expenditures that should be recorded as current period expenses are improperly capitalized as part of the cost of the asset, the effects on the financial statements can be enormous.

- In one of the largest accounting frauds in history, **WorldCom** (now part of Verizon) **inflated its income and cash flows from operations by billions of dollars.** This fraud turned WorldCom’s actual losses into large profits.

- Over five quarters in 2001 and 2002, the company initially announced that it had capitalized $3.8 billion that should have been recorded as operating expenses. By early 2004, auditors had discovered **$11 billion in necessary restatements** (reductions to previously reported pretax income) for 2000 and 2001.

- Accounting for expenses as capital expenditures increases current income because it a over spreads single period’s operating expenses

- future as It increases cash flows

- many periods depreciation expense. from operations by moving cash outflows from the operating section to the investing section of the cash flow statement.

## Being a Global Citizen

FedEx publishes an ESG report at **fedex.com/enus/sustainability/reports.html** stating that “ESG is integrated throughout our culture, and we align our sustainability approach with our mission, values, and long-term strategy.” Its 2023 ESG Report details the company’s progress toward meeting its environmental, social, and governance strategies, goals, and initiatives.  Here is a small excerpt from the 2023 ESG Report:

## Safeguarding Fixed Assets

It is **management’s responsibility** to establish internal controls to **safeguard long-lived assets** . Examples of these controls include:

- Creating a registry (a record) of each fixed asset with relevant information, such as the purchase date, serial number, acquisition date, and cost.

- Physically “tag” each asset with an identifying number. Technology, such as QR codes, simply this task.

- Compare the registry of assets to their physical locations on an annual basis.

- Establishing and following policies on capitalization, depreciation, and approval procedures for acquisition and disposal of assets.

The controls surrounding disposition of assets often are lacking. It is important that management established procedures to **segregate duties** (that is a different person at each point of the sale), such as: approving the sale, recording the sale in the accounting system, reconciling accounting records, and physically possessing the cash from the sale. Otherwise, there is a risk of loss to the company.

## Learning Objective 8-3

**8-3** Apply various cost allocation methods as assets are held and used over time.

## Depreciation Concepts (1 of 2)

Long-lived assets, _except for land_ , represents the prepaid cost of future services or benefits.

The **expense recognition (matching) principle** requires that a portion of an asset’s cost be allocated as an expense in the same period that revenues are generated by its use. The term used to identify the matching of the costs of using buildings and equipment with the revenues they generate is called . **deprecation**

## Depreciation Concepts (2 of 2)

- Depreciation is the process of **allocating the cost** of buildings and equipment over their productive lives using a **systematic and rational method.**

- Depreciation is **not a process of determining** an asset’s current **market value** or worth. The remaining balance sheet amount probably does not represent the asset’s current market value.

Depreciation has nothing to do with an asset’s market value (as if you were going to sell it) because **your intent is to use it.**

## Adjusting for Depreciation (1 of 4)

An adjusting journal entry is needed at the end of each period to reflect the use of buildings and equipment for the period.

**Debit Credit** Depreciation expense (+E, -SE) x,xxx Accumulated depreciation (+XA, -A) x,xxx Cost XX − − Accumulated Deprecia�on XX Net Book Value XX

## Adjusting for Depreciation (2 of 4)

- The amount of depreciation recorded during each period is reported on the income statement as **Depreciation Expense.**

- The amount of depreciation expense accumulated since the acquisition date is reported on the balance sheet as a contra-account, **Accumulated Depreciation,** and deducted from the related asset’s cost.

- The net amount on the balance sheet is called **net book value** or **carrying value.**

## Adjusting for Depreciation (3 of 4)

## Adjusting for Depreciation (4 of 4)

Once an asset’s cost is determined, to calculate depreciation expense, three pieces of information are required for each asset:

**1. Estimated useful life** to the company

**2. Estimated residual** (or salvage) value at the end of the assets’ useful life to the company

**3. Depreciation method**

_**Note: Estimated useful life** represents management’s estimate of the asset’s_ _**useful economic life to the company** rather than its total economic life to all potential users._

Managers may choose from these depreciation methods:

- Straight-line

- Units-of-production

- Declining-balance

## Book Value as an Approximation of Remaining Life

Some analysts compare the book value of assets to their original cost as an approximation of their remaining life.

Example:

- If book value of an asset is 100 percent of its cost, it is a new asset.

- If book value of an asset is 25 percent of its cost, it only has around 25 percent of its life remaining.

_**FedEx** ’s book value of its property and equipment ($40,698 million) was nearly 51 percent of its original cost ($80,624 million) on May 31, 2023, compared to nearly 52 percent for_ _**United Parcel Service** and 57 percent for . German company_ _**Deutsche Post DHL Group**_

- This comparison suggests that the flight equipment of FedEx and UPS may be **slightly older** than the equipment at DHL.

- This comparison is only a rough approximation and is **influenced by accounting issues such as how fast a company depreciates its assets.**

## Differences in Estimated Lives within a Single Industry

- Differences in estimated lives of assets may be attributable to a number of factors such as the type of aircraft used by each company, equipment replacement plans, operational differences, and the degree of management’s conservatism.

- Also, companies that plan to use the equipment over fewer years may estimate higher residual values.

- Differences in estimated lives and residual values of assets can have a significant impact on a comparison of the profitability of the competing companies.

Exhibit 8.2 Data for Illustrating the Computation of Depreciation under Alternative Methods Assume that **FedEx** acquired a new delivery van on June 1, 2026, the start of its fiscal year.

## Straight-Line Method (1 of 2)

## Notice that:

- Most companies select the straight-line depreciation method because it is the simplest method.

- The straight-line method is used when no other cost allocation method provides a better matching of revenues and expenses.

- Depreciation expense is a constant amount each year.

- Accumulated depreciation increases by an equal amount each year.

- Net book value decreases by the same amount each year until it equals

- the estimated residual value.

## Straight-Line Method (2 of 2)

## Units-of-Production Method (1 of 3)

- The **units-of-production depreciation** method relates depreciable cost to total estimated productive output or activity level.

- It can be used for depreciating equipment when production or activity levels vary over time, generating varying amounts of revenue—a good matching of expenses with revenues.

- The units-of-production method is used when activity or production level is the best determinant of life (e.g. commonly used for depreciating and depleting nature resources and related property.

## Units-of-Production Method (2 of 3)

First, divide the depreciable cost (cost minus residual value) by the estimated total production or activity level to determine the depreciation **unit rate** .

Then multiply the unit rate by the actual production or activity level for the period to determine the period’s depreciation expense.

## Units-of-Production Method (3 of 3)

## Declining-Balance Method

- An Accelerated Depreciation Method

If an asset is more efficient or productive when it is newer, managers might choose the **declining-balance depreciation method** to match a higher depreciation expense with higher revenues in the early years of an asset’s life and a lower depreciation expense with lower revenues in the later years. This is an **accelerated depreciation** method. _Accelerated methods are seldom used for financial reporting purposes._

~~**Depreciation Expense Revenues**~~ **Early Years High** ~~**High**~~ **Later Years Low Low**

## Double Declining-Balance Method (1 of 3)

**Annual computation ignores residual value.**

## Double Declining-Balance Method (2 of 3)

Two important differences between this method and the other depreciation methods:

1. Accumulated depreciation, not residual value, is included in the formula.

- Because accumulated depreciation increases each year, net book value (Cost minus Accumulated Depreciation) decreases.

- - **The double-declining rate is applied to a lower net book value each year, resulting in a decline in depreciation expense over time.**

- 2. As with the other methods, **the net book value should not be depreciated below the residual value.**

- If the computation reduces net book value below residual value, only the amount of depreciation expense needed to make net book value equal to residual value is recorded, and no additional depreciation expense is computed in subsequent years.

- In the last year of the asset’s estimated useful life, whatever amount is needed to bring net book value to residual value is recorded, regardless of the amount of the depreciation computation.

## Double Declining-Balance Method (3 of 3)

**Depreciation expense is limited to the amount that reduces book value to the estimated residual value.**

## Summary of the Three Depreciation Methods

## Impact of Alternative Depreciation Methods

Accelerated depreciation methods report higher depreciation and, therefore, lower net income during the early years of an asset’s life. As the age of the asset increases, this effect reverses.

The graph shown illustrates the relationship between the doubledeclining-balance method and the straight-line method of depreciation. **Differences in depreciation methods rather than real economic differences can cause significant variation in reported net incomes.**

## Increased Profitability Due to an Accounting Adjustment? Reading the Notes

- Financial analysts are interested in changes in accounting estimates because they impact a company’s before-tax operating income.

- In 2023, **Alphabet** (the parent company of **Google** ) and **IBM** disclosed their move to lengthen the depreciable lives of their server and network equipment, a move that boosted their income.

- Alphabet's change reduced the company's depreciation expense by $3.9 billion, resulting in a $3.0 billion increase in net income.

- IBM cited advances in technology for its change in useful life estimates, causing an expected pretax profit of over $200 million.

- Analysts pay close attention to a change in accounting estimates because it represents increased profitability due merely to an accounting adjustment.

## Objective of GAAP versus Tax Reporting

## Financial Reporting (GAAP)                             Tax Reporting (IRC)

The objective of financial reporting is to **provide economic information** about a business that is useful in projecting future cash flows of the business. Financial reporting rules follow generally accepted accounting principles.

The objective of the Internal Revenue Code is to **raise sufficient revenues** to pay for the expenditures of the federal government.

Many of the Code’s provisions are designed to encourage certain behaviors that are thought to benefit society.

. Most public companies maintain **two sets of accounting records** One for the stockholders and one for tax reporting.

## How Managers Choose

## Financial Reporting (GAAP)                                     Tax Reporting (IRC)

Managers determine which depreciation method provides the **best matching of revenues and expenses.**

When given a choice managers will apply the **least and latest rule** . All taxpayers want to pay the **lowest amount of tax that is legally permitted and at the latest possible date.**

- Choose the straight-line method (the most common and easy to use) if the asset provides benefits evenly over time. Managers find this method to be easy to use and to explain.

- Choose an accelerated method if assets produce more revenue in their early lives.

## Two Sets of Books?

- It is both legal and ethical to maintain separate records for tax and financial reporting purposes (“two sets of books”). However, these records must reflect the same transactions.

- Understating revenues or overstating expenses on a tax return can result in financial penalties and/or imprisonment.

- Accountants who aid tax evaders can be fined or imprisoned and lose their professional licenses.

## Deferred Tax Liabilities

By maintaining two sets of books, corporations can defer (delay) paying millions and sometimes billions of dollars in taxes. The following companies reported significant gross deferred tax obligations (liabilities) in their most recent annual reports. Much of these deferrals were due to differences in their choice of asset cost allocation (depreciation) methods.

## Learning Objective 8-4

**8-4** Explain the effect of asset impairment on the financial statements.

## Measuring Asset Impairment

Corporations must review long-lived tangible and most intangible assets for possible **impairment** when events or changed circumstances cause the estimated future cash flows of these assets to fall below their book value

There are **three steps** to test for impairment:

Step 1:  Consider whether **indicators** of impairment are present.

Step 2: **Test the recoverability** of the long-lived assets.

Step 3: **Measure the impairment** of the long-lived assets

## Measuring Asset Impairment

There are **three steps** to test for impairment of long-lived tangible and most intangible assets. This is step 1:

**Step 1:** Consider whether **indicators** of impairment are present.

Companies must look for indicators or triggers to decide when to impair assets.  The following factors may indicate impairment of assets:

- Significant pattern of decline of market price of the assets

- Lower demand due to global economic conditions

- Change in economic or legal factors (e.g., regulatory or technology changes)

- Obsolescence or physical damage to the asset

- Asset is held for disposal or is part of a restructuring

## Measuring Asset Impairment

There are **three steps** to test for impairment. Here are steps 2 & 3:

**Step 2: Test the recoverability of the long-lived assets.** When indicators of impairment exist, management assesses if the asset’s net book value is recoverable through estimated future cash flows. The asset is **impaired if not recoverable** when:

**Net book value (NBV) > Estimated future cash flows (FCF)**

**Step 3: Measure the impairment of the long-lived assets.** For any asset considered to be impaired, companies recognize a loss for the difference between the asset’s net book value and its **fair value** (a market concept). The impaired asset is **written down** to fair value.

**− Net book value (NBV) Fair Value (FV) = Impairment loss** A journal entry is made to record the loss due to impairment and reduce the asset.  The fair value becomes the new book value. _The asset is not written back up if conditions change in the future._

## Asset Impairment Illustration

Delta Air Lines reported the following in its 2020 10-K report (Note 2). Dollars are in millions:

## Learning Objective 8-5

**8-5** Analyze the disposal of property, plant, and equipment.

## Disposal of Property, Plant, and Equipment (1 of 5)

Businesses dispose of assets:

- **voluntarily (** sales, trade-ins, and retirements) or

- **involuntarily** as the result of a casualty such as a storm, fire, theft, or accident)

The asset disposal rarely happens at the end of the year therefore two journal entries are required as follows:

- Update depreciation expense through the date of disposal

- Record disposal by:

- - Recording **cash** received (debit) or paid (credit)

- - Writing off the **asset cost** (credit) and any **accumulated depreciation** (debit).

- - Recording a **gain** (credit) or **loss** (debit).

## Disposal of Property, Plant, and Equipment (2 of 5)

FedEx sold an aircraft for $11 million cash at the end of its 17(th) year of use. The aircraft originally cost $30 million and was depreciated using the straight-line method with zero residual value and a useful life of 25 years.

**Calculate the annual depreciation expense:**

**a. $0 Annual Depreciation: ($30,000,000 – $0) ÷ 25 years b. $1.2 million = $1,200,000 c. $1.5 million d. $2 million**

## Disposal of Property, Plant, and Equipment (3 of 5)

FedEx sold an aircraft for $11 million cash at the end of its 17(th) year of use. The aircraft originally cost $30 million and was depreciated using the straight-line method with zero residual value and a useful life of 25 years. **After updating the depreciation, the equipment’s book value at the end of the 17th year is: Accumulated Depreciation = a. $9.6 million × (17yrs. $1,200,000) = $20,400,000 b. $20.4 million c. $12.8 million BV = Cost – Accumulated Depreciation d. $6.6 million BV = $30,000,000 – $20,400,000 = $9,600,000**
*(See also: [[Accounting 1 Blab Handout 2024-2025 A.Y.#^1jftuo]])*

## Disposal of Property, Plant, and Equipment (4 of 5)

FedEx sold an aircraft for $11 million cash at the end of its 17(th) year of use. The aircraft originally cost $30 million and was depreciated using the straight-line method with zero residual value and a useful life of 25 years. **The equipment’s sale resulted in: Gain = Cash Received – Book Value a. a gain of $1.4 million Gain = $11,000,000 – $9,600,000 = b. a loss of $1.7 million $1,400,000 c. a gain of $3.8 million d. a gain of $6.2 million**

## Disposal of Property, Plant, and Equipment (5 of 5)

## Prepare the journal entry to update depreciation expense for Year 17:

## Prepare the journal entry to record the sale:

## Learning Objective 8-6

**8-6** Apply measurement and reporting concepts for intangible assets and natural resources.

## Nature of Intangible Assets

- Intangible assets are **increasingly important** resources for organizations.

- An intangible asset has value because of certain **rights** and **privileges** often conferred by law on its owner.

- An intangible asset has **no material or physical substance** . Instead, most intangible assets usually are evidenced by a legal document.

## Most common types of intangible assets:

- Goodwill (recognized in a business merger or acquisition)

- Trademarks

- Copyrights

- Technology (computer software and website)

- Patents

- Franchises

- Licenses and operating rights

- Other (customer lists/relationships, noncompete covenants, contracts and agreements)

Intangible assets are recorded **at historical cost only if they have been purchased.** If these assets are developed internally by the company, they are expensed when incurred.

## Amortization of Intangible Assets

Upon acquisition of intangible assets, managers determine whether they have definite or indefinite lives:

## Definite Life

- Cost is allocated (amortized) using the straight-line method over its useful life. Amortization is a cost allocation process similar to depreciation and depletion.

- Most companies do not estimate a residual value.

- The adjusting entry to record amortization of a patent with an $800,000 purchase price and legal life of 20 years is as follows:

## Indefinite Life

- Not amortized.

- Asset must be reviewed at least annually for possible impairment of value (first using qualitative factors).

- If impaired, the carrying value is reduced to fair market value.

## Common Intangibles (1 of 4)

## **Goodwill**:

- Goodwill is only recorded as an asset when one company buys another business. _Internally developed goodwill (such as developing a favorable reputation) is not reported as an asset._

- - The amount of goodwill equals the purchase price of the business less the fair market value of its net assets (assets minus liabilities).

- - Goodwill is not amortized but is reviewed annually for impairment.

## Common Intangibles (2 of 4)

## Trademarks:

- A special name, image or slogan identified with a product or company.

- Rarely seen on balance sheets because they are only recorded if purchased.

- Companies often spend millions developing trademarks, but most of those expenditures are recorded as expenses rather than being capitalized as an intangible asset.

## Copyrights

- The exclusive right to publish, use, and sell a literary, musical, or artistic work.

- Legal life is the life of the creator plus 70 years.

## Technology:

- Website development: Capitalize the costs of acquiring a domain name and developing graphics.

- Software: Capitalize the direct costs of developing software (coding and testing) after the software is technologically feasible. Amortize any costs related to software that is to be sold or leased to customers. Test the software annually for impairment. _Costs incurred during the preliminary concept phase should be expensed._

## Common Intangibles (3 of 4)

## Research & Development Costs:

- as an

- Research and development costs **are not capitalized** intangible asset due to uncertainty as to future benefits.

- These costs should be expensed and recorded on the income statement.

## Patents:

- A patent is an **exclusive right** granted by the federal government for 20 years for inventions and new processes.

- Owner can use, manufacture, and sell both the subject of the patent and the patent itself.

- If internally developed, only the registration fees and legal costs are capitalized (recorded as an asset).

## Common Intangibles (4 of 4)

## Franchises:

- Franchises may be granted by the government or a company  for a specific period and purpose.

- Franchise agreements are contracts.

- They usually require an investment by the franchisee; therefore, they should be accounted for as intangible assets.

- - The life of the franchise agreement depends on the contract and can be for a single year or indefinite period.

## Licenses and operating rights:

- These intangible assets are the permissions to use a product or service according to specific terms and conditions.

## Accounting for Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) as a Customer

- The demand by companies for public cloud software applications (SaaS software solutions and online data analysis) has grown tremendously in recent years.

- The SaaS market is projected to reach over $800 billion by 2030.

- SaaS customers usually pay a fixed amount monthly or annually for a subscriptionbased service.

**Do the fees paid result in an intangible asset for the customer?**

- Accounting for software-as-a-service arrangements is complex.

- If the **customer has the right to take possession** of the software (a software license), costs incurred by customers are to be **capitalized** and **amortized** over the term of the cloud computing arrangement.

- If the **customer cannot take possession** of the software, the arrangement is a service contract.

- or .

- Any setup and implementation costs are **capitalized expensed**



- Subscription fees paid to the SaaS provider are **expensed**

## Acquisition and Depletion of Natural Resources

## Natural Resources

- Companies develop raw material and products from natural resources, including mineral deposits such as lithium, gold, iron ore, oil wells, and timber tracts.

- These resources are called “wasting assets” because they are depleted (physically used up).

- When natural resources are acquired or developed, they are recorded at cost. The cost is allocated when the resource is used up. This allocation is called **depletion** .

- Depletion is the process of allocating a natural resource’s cost over the period of its exploitation.

- The units-of-production method is often used to compute depletion.

- The amount of the natural resource depletion is **capitalized** (recorded as inventory). The entry to record depletion is: Dr. Inventory  (+A)            x Cr. Natural Resource (−A)      x

- Later, when the asset is sold, Cost of Goods Sold (an expense) is recorded.

## Learning Objective 8-7

**8-7** Explain how the acquisition, use, and disposal of long-lived assets impact cash flows.

## Productive Lon-lived Assets, Depreciation, and Amortization

The acquisition, sale, depreciation, and amortization of long-term assets are reflected on a company’s cash flow statement. When the indirect method is used, adjustments to net income are made for depreciation expense and gains and losses that relate to sales of long-term assets.

Productive Assets and Depreciation Here is a partial statement of cash flows for FedEx Corporation:

## A Misinterpretation

Some analysts misinterpret the meaning of a noncash expense, saying that “cash is provided by depreciation.”

- Although depreciation is added in the operating section of the statement of cash flows, when using the indirect method, **depreciation is not a source of cash.**

- Depreciation expense reduces the amount of reported net income for a company, but it does not reduce the amount of cash generated by the .

- company because it is a **noncash expense**

- Cash from operations can only be provided by selling goods and services.

- Although depreciation is a noncash expense, the **depreciation for tax purposes can affect a company’s cash flows.** The higher the tax depreciation, the lower the taxable income and taxes the company must pay.

## Chapter Supplement:

## Changes in Depreciation Estimates (1 of 3)

**Chapter Supplement Depreciation is based on two estimates:** ESTIMATED ESTIMATED useful life residual value

If the estimates change, then the undepreciated asset balance (less any residual value at the date of the change) should be depreciated . **over the remaining useful life**

If improvements are made that extend the assets useful life, the depreciation must also be recalculated.

## Chapter Supplement: Changes in Depreciation Estimates (2 of 3)

To compute the new depreciation expense due to a change in estimate, substitute:

**Chapter Supplement**

- the net book value for the original acquisition cost,

- the new residual value for the original amount, and

- the estimated remaining life in place of the original estimated life.

## Chapter Supplement: Changes in Depreciation Estimates (3 of 3)

## Related Notes
- [[Accounting 1 Blab Handout 2024-2025 A.Y.]]
- [[Full-material presentation Chapter 4]]
- [[BLAB ACC SHEET CHAPTER 4]]