# Econ 30065: Microeconomics Sara Negrelli 

Oligopoly (I) 

## Oligopoly and Game Theory 

Ø Oligopoly: situation with few sellers and many buyers Ø In an oligopoly, each firm’s profit depends on the choices (P or Q) of the other firms: _strategic interaction_ Ø Economists determine the outcome of oligopolistic competition by applying game theory Ø As we saw, in game theory a firm’s most profitable choice given the actions of its rivals is called its _**best response**_ 

Ø In a Nash equilibrium of an oligopoly, each firm is making a profit-maximizing choice given the choices of its rivalsè NE in oligopoly is a pair of best responses to each other’s strategy! 

## Oligopoly Pricing Game with discrete set of actions 

Ø Suppose Pepsi/Coke can each choose to sell their product at high or low price Ø If one charges the high price but the other charges the low à most customers will go to the company that sells is at low price 

Ø Their joint profit would be highest if they could agree to both charge the high price (yellow area)-Pareto efficiency Ø What’s the NE of this game? 

**==> picture [249 x 357] intentionally omitted <==**

## Oligopoly Pricing Game 

Ø Each firm has an incentive to undercut the price of the other one 

- Ø But if both undercut their price, both will have lower profits. 

Pepsi’s dominant strategy 

- Ø In the end, NE will be ’ ’ s 

- (Pepsi s price low; Coke price low) 

- Ø This is a general problem facing every oligopolist firm. 

- Ø This is an example of ’ 

- _Prisoner s Dilemma_ . 

- Ø Charging the low price is a _dominant strategy_ for both 

**==> picture [40 x 65] intentionally omitted <==**

**==> picture [54 x 38] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Nash’s<br>payoffs<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Coke’s dominant strategy 

## Bertrand Model 

**Bertrand model of oligopoly:** _few_ firms produce _homogeneous_ (i.e identical) or _differentiated_ products and _set_ their _prices simultaneously_ 

_Assumption: constant marginal cost_ 

## Bertrand Model with homogenous goods 

ØTo keep things simple we study a Bertrand duopoly (Bertrand model with only two firms) ØAssumption: firms have constant marginal cost and no fixed costs ØOnce firms have set their prices simultaneously, buyers observe prices and decide how much to purchase from each firm ØThey purchase from firm with _lower price_ Ø Each firm’s most profitable choice depends on what the other does: 

Ø If the other firm has set a lower price, noone will buy from the first Ø If they pick the same price, demand is split in two Ø If the other firm has set a higher price, everyone will buy from the first 

## How to solve the game? 

ØOne-stage game 

ØInfinite set of actions 

èApply procedure for _one-stage games with finely divisible choices:_ 

- 1- find best response functions 

2- see where they cross each other: that is NE 

## Firms’ profits 

Firm 1: P1xQ-TC1 if P1< P2 P1x0.5Q-TC1 if P1= P2 0                         if P1> P2 Firm 2: P2xQ-TC2 if P2< P1 P2x0.5Q-TC2 if P2= P1 0                         if P2> P1 Where Q is the total market demand 

èeach firm wants to set the lowest price to maximize profits! 

## Firms’ best response function 

What is the best response function of each firm? MC if P ≤MC 1 2 1 P = P -0.01$ if MC <P ≤P 1 2 1 2 1[M] M M P if P >P 1 2 1 MC if P ≤MC 2 1 2 P = P -0.01$ if MC <P ≤P M 2 1 2 1 2 M M P if P >P 2 1 2 

## Nash Equilibrium 

Ø Look at firms’ best responses: Ø If firms have same MC: 

Ø P1=P2=MC is the only stable outcome! 

Ø Graphically P1=P2=MC is the only point where the best responses cross! 

Ø They split the demand in 2 è NE: (MC,MC) 

Ø If MC >MC : 1 2 

Ø P1=MC1 and P2=MC1-0.01$ is the only stable outcome Ø all the demand would go to firm 2! è NE: (MC1, MC1-0.01$) 

## Best response  functions 

**==> picture [544 x 380] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
BR1<br>P1<br>P [M]<br>BR2<br>NE<br>MC<br>MC P [M] P2<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## Example 

Assume two firms have same MC=40$ and they are a duopoly on the market. Assume that inverse market demand is given by P=100-2Q. If the 2 firms set their price simultaneously and independently, what is the NE of the game? 

## Example 

1) Describe best responses: 40 P = P -0.01$ 1 2 70 

if P ≤40 2 if 40<P ≤70 2 if P >70 2 if P ≤40 1 if 40<P ≤70 1 if P >70 1 

40 P = P -0.01$ 2 1 70 

2) Find NE: P1=P2=MC=40 

3) They split the demand 30/2=15 each! 

## Nash Equilibrium and Bertrand Duopoly 

Ø Bertrand outcome is the same as the perfectly competitive outcome (P=MC) 

Ø Implies that welfare losses due to market power are limited to monopoly markets 

Ø Overly optimistic Ø Some of the model’s assumptions may be at odds with reality: 

Ø Capacity limits! è look at quantity decisions: Cournot Model 

