# Econ 30065: Microeconomics Sara Negrelli 

Choices under uncertainty 

## Risk aversion 

Ø A person is _**risk averse**_ if, in comparing a riskless bundle to a risky bundle with the same expected value, he prefers the riskless bundle 

Ø Concave utility function 

Ø Degree of risk aversion may vary from person to person, or with age for the same person 

Ø The greater the concavity, the greater the risk aversion Ø For a _**risk-averse**_ person, the certainty equivalent of a risky bundle is always less than expected value Ø Providing the same expected value with no risk would make the individual better off Ø For a _**risk-averse**_ person, the risk premium is positive 

## Risk aversion example 

ØA person can have a $20,000 job with probability 1 and receives a utility level of 16 ØThe person could have a job with a 0.5 chance of earning $30,000 and a 0.5 chance of earning $10,000. ØUtility at $30,000 is 18 ØUtility at $10,000 is 10 

## Risk aversion example 

Ø Expected value of Risky Job EV=0.5x30000+0.5x10000=20000 

Ø Expected Utility of Risky Job E(U)=0.5(18)+0.5x10=14 

Ø Expected value from both jobs is the same – risk averse may choose current job Ø Expected utility is greater for certain job ØWould keep certain job 

## Risk averse utility function 

**==> picture [626 x 404] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Ø Risky job has<br>expected<br>U(I)<br>value of<br>utility<br>$20,000 with<br>expected<br>utility of 14<br>Ø Point F<br>18<br>Ø Certain job has<br>16 D expected<br>14 value of<br>F<br>$20,000 with<br>utility of 16<br>10<br>Ø Point D<br>RP<br>10 CE 20 30<br>income<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## Risk neutrality 

Ø A person is _**risk neutral**_ if, in comparing a riskless bundle to a risky bundle with the same expected value, he is indifferent between the two 

ØLinear utility function 

Ø For a _**risk-neutral**_ person, the certainty equivalent of a risky bundle is always equal to the expected value Ø Providing the same expected value with no risk would make the individual indifferent 

Ø For a _**risk-neutral**_ person, the risk premium is 

## zero 

## Risk neutrality utility function 

**==> picture [417 x 344] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
U(I)<br>utility<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


income 

## Risk loving 

Ø A person is _**risk lover**_ if, in comparing a riskless bundle to a risky bundle with the same expected value, he prefers the risky bundle 

ØConvex utility function 

ØThe greater the convexity, the greater the risk loving Ø For a _**risk-loving**_ person, the certainty equivalent of a risky bundle is always more than expected value Ø Providing the same expected value with no risk would make the individual worse off Ø For a _**risk-loving**_ person, the risk premium is negative 

## Risk loving example 

A person can have a $20,000 job with probability 1 and receive a utility level of 8. The person could have a job with a 0.5 chance of earning $30,000 and a 0.5 chance of earning $10,000. Utility at $30,000 is 18 and Utility at $10,000 is 3. 

## Risk loving example 

ØExpected value of Risky Job E(I)=0.5x30000+0.5x10000=20000 

ØExpected Utility of Risky Job E(U)=0.5(18)+0.5x3=10.5 

ØExpected income from both jobs is the same ØExpected utility is greater for uncertain job ØWould take uncertain job 

## Risk loving utility function 

||||Ø|Risky job has|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||U(I)||expected|
|utility||||income of<br>$20,000 with|
|||||expected|
|||||utility of 10.5|
|18||||Ø Point D|
||||Ø|Certain job has|
|10.5|D|||expected<br>income of|
|8|F|||$20,000 with|
|||||utility of 8|
|||||Ø Point F|
||RP||||
|3|||||



10 20CE 30 

income 

## Example 1 Ø Consider the following lottery: 

|**Probability**|**Payoff (x)**|
|---|---|
|1/3|$9|
|1/3|$36|
|1/3|$81|



Ø _u x_ = _x_ Silvio’s utility function is given by            ( ) ØCalculate the expected value of the lottery and Silvio’s expected utility from participating in this lottery. ØWould he prefer the lottery or to receive its expected value? 

- ØCalculate the certainty equivalent of the lottery. What’s Silvio’s risk premium? 

## Example 1 – solution: 

ØEV=1/3x9+1/3x36+1/3x81=42 Ø EU=1/3xu(9)+1/3xu(36)+1/3xu(81)=1+2+3=6 ØSince u(.) is concave, Silvio is risk averse. He will definitely prefer the safe option of taking 42 for sure. 

ØTo find CE, solve U(CE)=EU à CE=36 

Ø Risk premium=EV-CE=42-36=6>0 since he’s risk averse 

## Example 2 

## Ø Consider the following lottery: 

|**Probability**|**Payoff (x)**|
|---|---|
|1/2|$2|
|1/4|$4|
|1/4|$8|



Ø Silvia’s utility function is given by _u_ ( _x_ ) = _x_[2] ØCalculate the expected value of the lottery and Silvia’s expected utility from participating in this lottery. ØWould she prefer the lottery or to receive its expected value? 

- ØCalculate the certainty equivalent of the lottery. What’s Silvia’s risk premium? 

## Example 2 – solution: 

ØEV=1/2x2+1/4x4+1/4x8=4 

- Ø EU=1/2xu(2)+1/4xu(4)+1/4xu(8)=22 ØSince u(.) is convex, Silvia is risk loving. She will definitely prefer the lottery to having 4 for sure. 

ØTo find CE, solve U(CE)=EU à CE=sqrt(22)=~4.7 

- Ø Risk premium=EV-CE=4-4.7=-0.7<0 since she’s risk-loving 

