---
course: Microeconomics
course_code: "30065"
tags:
  - "source"
  - course_30065
Links:
Title: "Econ 30065: Microeconomics Sara Negrelli"
Reference: "Course Material"
Created: 2026-05-18
Processed: true
---


# Econ 30065: Microeconomics Sara Negrelli

L6

## Utility

- Utility is a numeric value indicating the consumer’s **relative** well being from consuming a bundle of goods. - Higher utility indicates greater satisfaction than lower utility.

- A **utility function** is a mathematical formula that assigns a utility value to each consumption bundle: $$U(X,Y)$$
$$=$$
$$f(X,Y)$$

- Example: $$U(F,C)$$
$$=2F+5(FxC)$

A basket of Fries=2 and Chicken=1 gives a utility: $$
$$U(2,1)=2$ \times 2+5(2 \times 1)=14$

## Ordinal vs. Cardinal Utility

- **Ordinal information** allows us to determine only whether one alternative is better or worse than another.

- **Cardinal information** tells us something about the _intensity_ of those preferences.

- In modern microeconomic theory, utility functions are only intended to summarize ordinal information, rejecting old cardinal interpretations of utility. - Example: if one consumption bundle has a utility value of 10 and a second has a utility value of 5, we know the consumer prefers the first to the second, but it does not necessarily make him twice as happy.

## From Preferences to Utility

- Utility functions: starting from preferences to summarize consumers’ behavior.

- Start from preferences: give same utility to bundles on same indifference curves - Higher utility to bundles on IC further form the origin.

- You can go from IC to utility and viceversa

## From Indifference Curves to Utility Function

- - Each IC correspond to one point on the utility function

- - Higher utility values for indifference curves that correspond to higher levels of well-being (further from the origin).

## Example

- Robert enjoys reading books and watching movies. His utility function is $$U(M,B)$$
$$=2MxB,$ where M is the number of movies and B is the number of books enjoyed during a month. What do these curves look like? - Fix U - B=U/2M - Convex curves

## Example

- Marta enjoys reading books and watching movies. Her utility function is $$U(M,B)$$
$$=MxB^2$ , where M is the number of movies and B is the number of books enjoyed during a month. How does Marta rank the following bundles? - 1) 4 movies and 5 books - 2) 10 movies and 4 books - 3) 25 movies and 2 books - 4) 40 movies and 1 books
*(See also: [[C28#^vo4lot]])*

## Solution

- Find Utilities: - Bundle 1) gives U=4 \times 5(2) =100 - 2) U=10 \times 4(2) =160 - 3)U=25 \times 2(2) =100 - 4)U=40 \times 1=40

- Thus the second bundle is the preferred one

## Utility Function and MRS

## MRS can be rewritten as:

Where MUx, the marginal utility of good X, is the change in the consumer’s utility resulting from the addition of a very small amount of that good: Same for MU Y.

## Example continued

- What is Robert marginal utility from movies? And from books?

- _take derivative of utility wrt Movies:_ - _MU =2B M_

- _take derivative of utility wrt Books:_ - _MU =2M B_

- What is the MRS for movies with books? - _MUm/MUB=B/M_

## Some Common Utility Functions

- Cobb-Douglas utility functions

## Cobb-Douglas Utility Functions

- Two families of indifference curves for Cobb-Douglas utility functions - Declining MRS - MRS=(a/b)(Y/X) - _a_ Slope depends on and _b_

## Related Notes
- [[C28]]
- [[C5]]
- [[C27]]